All right, guys.
In this video, we're going to look at aligning elements.
We're going to look at aligning text, and we're going to look at auto margin.
So let's create a new file here called zero seven.
And I'm just going to call this float, underscore a line dot HTML and throw in our tags here, had
body tags and we'll say float and align
style.
And all I want here is three divs with the class of box, but I want them to have separate IDs so that
we can target them separately as well.
Now, with Emmett, I don't think I showed you this.
If we want to add an ID and a class, we can do like ID box one class box, we can do that.
And then I'm just going to put an H three in here and I'm just going to say heading doesn't really matter.
And then we'll do form 20 and we're going to copy this down two more times and just change the ID to
two and then three.
So we'll save that and let's open this with live server.
Okay.
Now, first thing I want to show you is how to center your your content or your layout.
Because in just about all cases, every website you go to, it's in the center.
It's not over to the to the left like this.
Maybe in like the nineties or early 2000 it was.
But now your stuff is going to be in the middle.
So to do that is pretty easy.
We just need to have a container class or ID and or container element, I should say.
And then we need to add a width to it and set the margin to auto.
If we set the margin to auto, it's going to add the same amount of margin on both sides, pushing it
into the middle.
So let me show you what I mean.
I'm going to wrap this in a class called Container.
You'll see the class name container often container or wrap or wrapper.
And then we're going to grab everything here and put it inside the container.
Let me just fix this up a little bit.
All right, so up here in our CSIS, let's do container and let's set a width of.
Now it's up to you how how wide you want your layout to be.
I'm going to do 960, which is kind of kind of narrow.
And then actually we'll just do that for now.
And if we go back to our loops, if we go back to our content and I open up our chrome tools and take
a look, you'll see that, oops, I want to go to the container.
You'll see that the blue, it ends at 960 pixels.
That's 960 wide.
Now to move it to the middle is very simple.
All we have to do is add in margin auto.
If I save that, we go back.
Now, you'll see it's in the middle and the orange part on the sides is the margin.
And notice it's the same.
It's even on both sides.
That's what happens if you do margin auto.
Now if you want to move it down a little bit, if you want margin on the top and bottom, you could
do something like this.
You could say 30 pixels for top and bottom auto on the left and right.
And now if I hover over it, you'll see that there's 30 on the top and bottom.
Now there's there's an issue with using just width in this case.
So let me show you that it has to do with responsive design.
You want to do all you can to make your site look decent on mobile devices.
And we're going to get more into this later.
But if I go down like this, like if we were to view this on a mobile device, you can't even read the
text.
You have this scrollbar, which is just horrible.
We want all the text to display here.
So to fix that is very simple.
All we have to do is go from width to using max width.
So if I save that, we go back.
Now all the text is there regardless of the screen size.
And then once I get to 960, it's going to it's going to stop.
That's the boundary because we set a max width of 960.
So you should always use max width on your containers.
So next thing I'm going to do is just kind of style these boxes a little bit and the body I'm just going
to throw in a body style of let's do font, let's do font, family, Arial, Helvetica, sans serif.
And then I'm just going to add a line height of 1.4 REM or M
and let's see, let's, let's style the box class a little bit.
So for Bocks, we'll do background light gray and border one pixel solid dark gray padding 20 pixels
and let's do margin bottom ten, 15 pixels.
All right.
So let's take a look at that.
So all of our boxes now have 20 pixels padding.
They have the border, the the background and some margin to push the the other ones down.
So before we get into floating, I just want to look at the text align property and that's what text
a line is used for is just text.
It's not used to align boxes and stuff.
So let's just target the paragraph in here.
So I'm going to say box and then we want to grab the paragraphs within the box.
Let's put a comment here saying this is for the text line property.
So by default it's aligned to the left.
If I do that, it's just going to stay how it is.
But let's say we wanted that aligned to the right oops.
We wanted to text a line, right?
And if we look at that now, the text is aligned to the right.
If we want it to the center, we could do center and it's just overwriting.
I can leave these whatever the last one is that's going to overwrite the other ones.
So now center, so that center and that text aligned center is used often and I could put text align
center on the div if I wanted this and if I wanted everything within it to be centered as well.
And then we could also do justify.
So justify will just make the edges all even.
You can't really tell here because.
Because there's not much text.
But if I make this smaller.
See how it's all even on the edge.
So that's justify.
I'm sure you guys have used Justify and like Microsoft Word or something.
All right.
So now I want to talk about floating and I just want to explain something real quick.
So I'm going to just do a search for HTML layout example, go to images.
Let's see, let's look at this old bootstrap layout.
So over here we have a sidebar and then we have a main area.
So these are aligned horizontally.
And then inside the main area, we have some boxes that are also aligned horizontally.
Now we can do this with floats and that's what what we're working on right now.
But that's not the the way that you should do it now these days, because now we have Flexbox that's
built into CSS.
We also have CSS grid.
And to use those, we use the display property, we can say display flex or display grid, and then
we have some other properties that are associated with it.
And this is the, the, the way that you should do this stuff these days.
A couple of years ago, we would have to use floats and floats are much more of a pain in the neck because
you have to clear them.
It's more of a pain dealing with responsive design, dealing with, you know, mobile devices and stuff
like that.
So it's not ideal anymore.
But with that said, I still want you guys to know how to use floats.
In fact, the project that we're going to do next, the hotel website, we are going to use floats because
I don't want to get into flex or the grid just yet.
So just keep that in mind.
Just keep in mind that we're learning floats, but it's not something that you're going to use use that
much or that you should use that much.
So let's say that we want to take blocks two and three.
We want box two to float to the left, come to about here or so.
We want box three to be kind of a sidebar, a more narrow box.
So let's do that.
Let's jump in and let's target box two, which has an ID of box two and let's say float to the left.
Now, if we do just that, it doesn't do much.
You'll see that it's kind of it's kind of put it right on top of box three, but you want to add a width
when you're floating something.
So let's say width and I could use pixels, but it gets kind of messy.
You're probably going to want to use percentages.
Now the container that the boxes are in is 960 pixels max width.
So what we can do is let's use a percentage of 70% and then we'll take box three and let's float that
to the right.
And let's say we want the width to be 30% because obviously 70 and 30 is 100% of its container.
So let's see what that looks like.
We'll save it.
We'll go back and we have an issue.
It's not it's not fitting.
Now, the reason for that is because we didn't set the border box property.
Remember, in the last video I showed you that when you add padding, which both of these have, it
adds to the width.
So this is another pain in the pain in the neck for for floating, it adds to the width.
So we have to actually add a box sizing property on the asterisk.
Well, we don't have to put it on the asterisk, but I always do.
Just to.
Because I want all elements.
I want this applied to everything.
So let's say box sizing.
We want to set the border box.
So once I do that, it takes away that it doesn't add the padding to the actual widths.
So now it fits.
But they're right on top of each other.
So what I would do in this situation is probably just lessen the percentage.
So instead of 74, box two, let's change it to 68 so it doesn't go all the way over.
And there we go.
All right.
Now, this isn't going to look right if we make this smaller.
But we're not going to get into that yet.
We're not going to get into responsiveness yet.
The website, the hotel website we build, we will be using media queries and stuff to to make it responsive.
So, I mean, this is how we would do it before Flex and CSS grid came out.
Now, I just want to show you guys that if we add another div below this and we'll just call this box
four.
So remember two, two and three are floated and then box four is under it.
So let's see what that looks like.
It doesn't look right.
So it's basically put behind it.
It doesn't push it down under the floated elements because the floated elements have to be cleared.
This is another pain in the neck when it comes to floating.
So what we would do or one thing we could do is add a class, a utility class.
I'm going to put it up here.
I'll call it class for clear and we'll set the clear property to both because we want to clear the left
and right floats that we just created.
And then we would have to put it right under where the float is, which is under two and three.
So div class clear.
Now if we go back, box four is pushed down.
So remember, if you if you use floating, you're going to have to clear them in most cases.
Now, another area that floating is used is in navigation bars.
A lot of time you'll see the horizontal navigations.
So in the next video, we're going to look at styling links and buttons.
And we're also going to look at creating a basic navigation bar where we float the the list items.
All right.
So I'll see you in the next video.